

===== PAGE 1 =====
Enhanced volcanic hot-spot detection using MODIS IR data:
results from the MIROVA system
D. COPPOLA1*, M. LAIOLO1,2, C. CIGOLINI1,3, D. DELLE DONNE2,4 & M. RIPEPE2
1Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Universita` di Torino,
Via Valperga Caluso 35, 10135 Torino, Italy
2Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Universita` di Firenze,
Via G. La Pira 4, 50121 Firenze, Italy
3NatRisk, Centro Interdipartimentale sui Rischi Naturali in Ambiente Montano e Collinare,
Universita` degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy
4Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra e del Mare, Universita` di Palermo,
Via Archiraﬁ22, 90123 Palermo, Italy
*Corresponding author (e-mail: diego.coppola@unito.it)
Abstract: We describe a new volcanic hotspot detection system, named Middle InfraRed Obser-
vation of Volcanic Activity (MIROVA), based on the analysis of infrared data acquired by the
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer sensor (MODIS). MIROVA uses the middle
infrared radiation (MIR), measured by MODIS, in order to detect and measure the heat radia-
tion deriving from volcanic activity. The algorithm combines spectral and spatial principles, allow-
ing the detection of heat sources from 1 megawatt (MW) to more than 10 gigawatt (GW). This
provides a unique opportunity to: (i) recognize small-scale variations in thermal output that may
precede the onset of effusive activity; (ii) track the advance of large lava ﬂows; (iii) estimate
lava discharge rates; (iv) identify distinct effusive trends; and, lastly, (v) follow the cooling
process of voluminous lava bodies for several months. Here we show the results obtained from
data sets spanning 14 years recorded at the Stromboli and Mt Etna volcanoes, Italy, and we inves-
tigate the above aspects at these two persistently active volcanoes. Finally, we describe how the
algorithm has been implemented within an operational near-real-time processing chain that ena-
bles the MIROVA system to provide data and infrared maps within 1–4 h of the satellite overpass.
During an eruptive crisis or volcanic unrest, one
of the primary contributions of satellite-derived
thermal data is to provide information about the
presence, or absence, of thermal anomalies (i.e. hot-
spots) associated with the observed phenomena
(Ramsey & Harris 2012 and references therein).
Speciﬁcally, satellite-based thermal efforts focus
on data collected in the thermal infrared region
(IR: 0.7–20 mm), especially in the atmospheric win-
dows in the mid-infrared (MIR: 3.44–4.13 mm)
and thermal infrared (TIR: 8.6–12.2 mm) (Harris
2013).
A series of critical parameters may be promptly
delivered by the IR remote sensing community to
the observatories and civil protection agencies in
order to mitigate eruption hazards. Generally, this
information consists of: (i) the location of the hot-
spot(s); (ii) the area and temperature of the heat
source; (iii) the excess of ‘radiance’ or heat
ﬂux(s); and (iv) the mass or volume ﬂux(s). This
data can be used to help reduce eruption-related
hazards to lives and property and, in the case of
effusive activity, provide essential input parameters
for numerical models that predict the path of lava
ﬂows (Favalli et al. 2005; Wright et al. 2008;
Proietti et al. 2009; Vicari et al. 2009; Ganci et al.
2012b; Del Negro et al. 2013). Lava ﬂows can
cause a major decrease in agricultural productivity
and considerable damage to property, and, in some
cases, they may also cause a signiﬁcant number of
deaths, such as during the 1977 and 2002 eruptions
of Nyiragongo volcano (IRIS 2002; Baxter 2011).
Depending on the sensor and the applied meth-
odology, the quality of this information can dif-
fer substantially. For example, the data provided by
the geostationary sensors (e.g. Geostationary Oper-
ational Environmental Satellite (GOES), Spinning
Enhanced Visible and InfraRed Imager (SEVIRI);
GOES-class sensors, according to the classiﬁca-
tion of Harris 2013) enable us to estimate the ther-
mal output every 15–30 min, and is thus crucial
for tracking short-term variations in major effu-
sive activity (e.g. Ganci et al. 2012a; Gouhier
et al. 2012). However, the low spatial resolution
From: Harris, A. J. L., De Groeve, T., Garel, F. & Carn, S. A. (eds) Detecting, Modelling and Responding to Effusive
Eruptions. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 426, http://doi.org/10.1144/SP426.5
# 2015 The Author(s). Published by The Geological Society of London. All rights reserved. For permissions:
http://www.geolsoc.org.uk/permissions. Publishing disclaimer: www.geolsoc.org.uk/pub_ethics
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 2 =====
characterizing these sensors (i.e. 4–20 km) is not
adequate for locating the source of the hotspot
with precision and does not enable the detection of
low thermal anomalies that may precede the major
effusions (i.e. slow magma rising). Conversely, the
high-resolution images (i.e. 30 m) provided by the
TM-class sensors (e.g. Landsat suite; Advanced
Spaceborne
Thermal
Emission
and
Reﬂection
Radiometer (ASTER); Earth Observatory Satellite;
EOS-1 suite: Harris 2013) are extremely efﬁcient
in detecting small thermal sources, and allow us to
locate the active vent(s) with precision, as well as
lava channels, levees and ﬂow front(s), and, more
generally, enable us to discriminate between active
or inactive lava areas (Flynn et al. 2000; Lombardo
et al. 2009; Wright et al. 2010). In other words,
they allow us to characterize the thermal state of
the observed lava bodies with greater accuracy,
including the measurements of their areas, tempera-
tures, heat and mass ﬂuxes (Oppenheimer 1991;
Harris et al. 1998; Flynn et al. 2001; Lombardo &
Buongiorno 2006). In addition, the characteristic
temperature distribution obtained with some of
these high-resolution sensors (e.g. the Hyperion
sensor carried on NASA’s Earth Observing–1
spacecraft) may help to constrain effusive tempera-
tures, as well as to provide clues as to the lava com-
position (Wright & Flynn 2003; Davies et al. 2011;
Wright et al. 2011). However, despite their high
degree of efﬁciency, these sensors currently pro-
vide data and images with a temporal coverage of
several days; a resolution that is still too low to
enable tracking of the short-term evolution of volca-
nic activity at selected sites.
An excellent compromise between these two
end-member classes is offered by sensors with mod-
erate spatial resolution (e.g. Advanced Very High
Resolution Radiometer; AVHRR-class, according to
Harris 2013) that provide several images per day,
with a ground resolution of 500–1000 m.
A number of hotspot detection algorithms have
been applied to the data acquired by these kinds of
sensors (including MODIS), and a comprehensive
review of their strengths and weaknesses can be
found in Steffke & Harris (2011) and Harris
(2013). The authors concluded that each algorithm
operates well within the criteria of its design
requirement, with the main limitations being due
to the following:
† Global hotspot detection systems (e.g. MOD-
VOLC: Wright et al. 2002), based on a ﬁxed
threshold, require little processing power (no
temporal and no spatial analysis) but can-
not detect small thermal anomalies.
† Local hotspot detection systems based on
adapted thresholds (e.g. MODLEN: Kervyn
et al. 2006) are more precise, but require input
parameters that are not exportable on a global
scale.
† Local hotspot detection systems based on tem-
poral (e.g. RAT: Pergola et al. 2004) or spatial
(e.g. VAST: Harris et al. 1995) analysis require
more processing power, owing to the analysis
of a large amount of data, and are more difﬁcult
to apply on a global scale and in near real time.
In order to improve the detection capability, a
number of ‘hybrid’ algorithms have been developed
by coupling spectral, spatial and temporal principles
(e.g. Dean et al. 1998; Koeppen et al. 2011; Coppola
et al. 2014) or by using artiﬁcial neural networks
(Piscini
&
Lombardo
2014).
For
example,
Coppola et al. (2014) proposed a hybrid approach
that has been expressly developed for tracking ther-
mal anomalies at Stromboli volcano using MODIS
data. As for the OKMOK algorithm (Dehn et al.
2000), the basic principle of this hybrid approach
was to model the regional background for Strom-
boli, a procedure that requires the analysis of at
least 1 year of recorded data (Coppola et al. 2014).
Although the results are excellent for Stromboli,
application of the same procedure to other target
volcanoes would require the analysis of their histori-
cal data sets since the thresholds (and associated
parameters) must be determined case by case. For
example, running Coppola’s 2014 algorithm for Mt
Etna volcano would not have worked as the para-
meters found for Stromboli do not apply to Mt Etna.
In this paper we describe a new automatic hot-
spot detection system, named Middle Infrared
ObservationofVolcanicActivity(MIROVA),which
aims to combine greater accuracy of local hotspot
detection systems with an easier exportability,
necessary for extending the application to different
volcanoes, and in near-real time. Hence, the main
motivation for developing the MIROVA algorithm
was to develop a hotspot detection system that
does not require the analysis of historical data sets
but produces results of the same quality as the algor-
ithms speciﬁcally calibrated for any target volcano
(i.e. with a case by case determination of adapted
thresholds: cf. Coppola et al. 2014).
MIROVA is based on the analysis of the middle
infrared radiation (MIR) detected by the MODIS
sensor, and combines spatial and spectral principles
allowing the detection of thermal anomalies from
1 MW to more than 10 GW. After describing the
main steps of the processing chain, we will present
the results obtained from the analysis of data sets
spanning 14 years from Stromboli and Mt Etna vol-
canoes, with special emphasis on the periods char-
acterized by effusive activity. This gives us the
opportunity to outline the main contributions that
MIROVA provides for tracking, monitoring and
modelling lava effusion and the volcanic processes
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 3 =====
associated with distinct eruptive episodes. Lastly,
we describe the implementation of the algorithm
in terms of a near-real-time web-based system
(hosted at www.mirova.unito.it), emphasizing the
possibility that this monitoring system could easily
be expanded to cover a wide range of volcanic
targets.
The MIROVA system
The MIROVA system is based on MODIS Level
1B data provided by NASA’s Terra (launched on
December 1999) and Aqua (launched on May 2002)
sensors that allow a target volcano to be imaged
approximately four times per day (http://ge.ssec.
wisc.edu/modis-today/about.html). MODIS gran-
ules are analysed in ﬁve principal steps. These are:
(i) data extraction; (ii) cropping and resampling;
(iii) deﬁnition of regions of interest (ROIs); (iv)
hotspot detection; and, lastly, (v) calculation of the
‘excess’ MIR radiance and radiative power (RP).
Data extraction from MODIS Level 1B
granules
The ﬁrst step deals with the extraction of the data of
interest from the MODIS Level 1 granules. These
data consist of the date and time of satellite over-
passes, the satellite viewing geometry (zenith and
azimuth) and pixel(s) geolocation (latitude and
longitude), as well as the digital number (DN)
related to seven spectral bands of interest:
(i) reﬂectivity
of
band
1
(R1),
centred
at
0.645 mm (for daytime images only);
(ii) reﬂectivity
of
band
2
(R2),
centred
at
0.858 mm (for daytime images only);
(iii) radiance of band 6 (L6), centred at 1.64 mm
(for daytime images only);
(iv) radiance
of
band
21
(L21),
centred
at
3.959 mm (low-gain MIR channel);
(v) radiance
of
band
22
(L22),
centred
at
3.959 mm (high-gain MIR channel);
(vi) radiance
of
band
31
(L31),
centred
at
11.03 mm (thermal infrared (TIR) channel);
(vii) radiance
of
band
32
(L32),
centred
at
12.02 mm (TIR channel).
The DN of each selected band was ﬁrst scanned to
ﬁlter out any missed or ‘corrupted’ data. According
to the MODIS Level 1B Product User’s Guide
(Toller et al. 2006), this is achieved by eliminating,
for each band, all the pixels with DN . 32 768 (i.e.
the invalid data values), with the exception of the
pixels with DN ¼ 65 533, indicating saturated
values.
The georeferred data were also scanned in order
to remove the bow-tie effect that produces the
so-called ‘scan to scan’ overlapping at the edge of
the swath (Nishihama et al. 1997).
Once the effects of invalid and bow-tie related
pixels had been removed, we used the conversion
coefﬁcients for each selected band (scale and
offset) to convert the DN into reﬂectivity and/or
radiance data (for details regarding this step see
the MODIS Level 1B Product User’s Guide).
Lastly, we built a corrected spectral band centred
at 3.959 mm (hereby called band L21ok), by using
the L21 or L22 radiance, depending on band 22 satur-
ation (or not), respectively.
Cropping and resampling of original
MODIS granules
Cropping and resampling of the original Level 1B
MODIS data is necessary for two main reasons.
First, because high scan angles contribute to the
growth of the projected ground spatial element (up
to c. 10 km2 for scan angles of 558: Nishihama
et al. 1997). This leads to the radiance of a potential
subpixel hotspot being integrated over a variable
area (depending on the scan angle) introducing an
‘inherited’ error source in estimating its thermal
output. Secondly, because the hotspot detection
scheme, described below, requires homogenous
pixel scale.
Thus, we cropped and resampled (into an equally
spaced 1 km grid) the MODIS Level 1B data that
fall within a grid (50 × 50 km) centred on the
volcano’s summit (Fig. 1). For this purpose we
used the Global Volcanism Program volcano data-
base (http://www.volcano.si.edu/) as the reference
source for the volcano nomenclature and for the
summit latitude and longitude.
Hence, we produced a series of matrices for the
bands of interest described above, which were
stored in the local computer. This step reduces the
size of the ingested data from approximately
150 Mb, for the original MODIS granule, to less
than 250 kb for the whole resampled matrices.
For clarity, in this paper we use the term ‘matrix’
to indicate the square array of numbers (radiances or
reﬂectances) that results from the resampling of the
original MODIS granules. A visual representation
(in the form of an image) of a matrix is termed a
‘map’.
Regions of interest
An important step in the processing ﬂowchart is the
deﬁnition of two concentric regions of interest
(ROIs) within the resampled matrices. The ﬁrst,
inner region (ROI1) consists of a box (5 × 5 km)
centred on the volcano’s summit, where summit
crater(s) are typically present and where small-scale
thermal activity is more likely to occur (Fig. 1). The
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 4 =====
second, larger region (ROI2) represents the outer
frame (measuring 50 × 50 km) and includes the
whole scene with the exception of the ROI1. As
speciﬁed later, different thresholds will be applied
to these two distinct ROIs.
Hotspot detection
Spectral analysis: NTI and ETI matrices. Once the
radiance data has been resampled into equal-area
matrices, we used two of them (L21ok and L32) to
produce additional matrices that represent distinct
thermal indexes.
The ﬁrst index is the Normalized Thermal Index
(NTI), introduced by Wright et al. (2002), which is
calculated as follows:
NTI = LMIR −LTIR
LMIR + LTIR
(1)
where LMIR is the radiance recorded by the MIR
channel (L21ok) and LTIR is the radiance of the TIR
channel (L32).
Fig. 1. (a) Location of Stromboli and Mt Etna volcanoes in southern Italy. Two examples of resampled MODIS
data produced by MIROVA, for (b) Stromboli and (c) Etna, respectively. The original MODIS granules are cropped
and resampled within a 50 × 50 km grid, which is centred on the summit of the volcano. The spatial resolution of the
resampled maps is 1 km. The white box outlines the inner region of interest (ROI1). See the text for details.
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 5 =====
Then, we calculated a second empirical index,
similar to the NTI, which we call ‘apparent NTI’
(NTIapp). In performing this step, we assumed that
each pixel was characterized by an apparent and
homogeneous surface temperature (Tapp) equal to
the brightness temperature (BT) recorded in the TIR
channel (Tapp ¼ BTTIR). In addition, we assumed
that the atmospheric transmission and the emissivity
of the ground sampled in each pixel were constant
at all wavelengths. Accordingly, we calculated an
apparent MIR radiance (LMIR, app) on the basis of
the assumed apparent temperature (Tapp):
LMIR,app = PMIR(Tapp)
(2)
where PMIR is the Plank’s function. The apparent
NTI thus becomes:
NTIapp = LMIR,app −LTIR
LMIR,app + LTIR
.
(3)
In practical terms, the NTIapp simulates the NTI
in the event of each pixel having a homogeneous
temperature, and where the emissivity and atmos-
pheric transmission are constant at all wavelengths.
Thus, any discrepancy between the observed NTI
and the apparent NTIapp highlights a failure in the
above assumptions. For example, in Figure 2 we
plot the observed NTI (equation 1) for two night-
time images acquired over Mt Etna volcano (2500
pixels each) v. the apparent NTI (NTIapp), calculated
using equation (3). It can be noted that this relation-
ship is not linear and deviates from the 1:1 ratio,
based on the real conditions sampled by each pixel
(e.g. thermal homogeneity, emissivity and atmos-
pheric transmission). A quadratic best-ﬁt regression
allows this trend to be normalized so that a third
empirical index (which we term NTIbk) is obtained
according to:
NTIbk = aNTI2
app + bNTI + c
(4)
where a, b and c are the polynomial parameters
obtained by the regression (see Fig. 2a, c).
Note that parameters a, b and c are obtained for
each case, and distinct regression coefﬁcients are
retrieved from each single image. Hence, the
NTIbk should represent a ﬁrst-order approximation
of the background NTI in the absence of a hotspot.
In this case, a strong departure from the 1:1 ratio
would essentially be a clear indication of hotspot-
contaminated pixels (Fig. 2b, d). This principle is
the basis of the so-called Enhanced Thermal Index
(ETI), which is obtained by subtracting the back-
ground NTIbk (equation 4) from the observed NTI
(equation 1) so that:
NTIbk = aNTI2
app + bNTIapp + c.
(5)
The effectiveness of this procedure in enhanc-
ing the presence of hotspots is shown in Figure 3.
In fact, while the hotspots on the summit of Mt
Etna are absent from the background NTIbk maps
(Fig. 3b, e) or weak on the NTI maps (Fig. 3a, d),
they are clearly visible on the ETI maps (Fig. 3c, f).
It should be noted that a perturbation of the TIR
signal due to large volcanic heat sources (i.e. large
lava ﬂows) does not affect the hotspot detection
since the ‘measured’ NTI will always be higher
than the ‘apparent’ NTI (NTIapp). This is due to the
fact that the NTI is highly sensitive to the presence
of hot surfaces (causing a strong increase in LMIR),
whereas the apparent MIR radiance (LMIR, app) at
the base of the NTIapp will be less affected according
to the TIR signal.
Spatial analysis: dNTI and dETI matrices
Step 2 consists of the spatial analysis of two of the
previously described indexes, namely the NTI and
the ETI. This step is performed one pixel at a
time, and consists of subtracting from its value
(NTI or ETI) the average (arithmetic mean) of the
eight neighbouring pixels.
Notably, the presence of clouds is not taken into
account by the algorithm and all eight neighbouring
pixels are used to compute the spatial average. This
is a simple spatial ﬁltering that does not take into
account the type of surface imaged by each pixels
(e.g. land, sea, clouds), just ‘its variability with
respect to the surroundings’.
The ﬁltered matrices thus obtained (hereby
called dNTI and dETI) enhance local variations of
the above indexes, and produce positive values for
pixels with values higher than the surrounding
ones. An example of dNTI and dETI obtained for
an image acquired over Mt Etna on 25 July 2012
at 00:40 UTC (Coordinated Universal Time) is
shown in Figure 4 (at that time a small lava
outﬂow was occurring within the Bocca Nuova
crater: INGV 2012).
In performing this spatial ﬁlter, some pixels need
to be ﬁltered out and are considered ‘unsuitable’ for
further analysis. These unsuitable pixels are:
† all the pixels at the edge of the resampled
matrices;
† all the pixels with dNTI or dETI ,20.1.
While the ﬁrst condition eliminates the pixels with
anomalous values associated with the edge resam-
pling and spatial averaging procedure, the second
condition eliminates the negative outliers that
would alter the contextual thresholds presented in
the next section.
The rest of the pixels are thus considered
‘suitable’ and are subjected to the subsequent steps.
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Fixed NTI threshold
This step is performed to detect ‘active’ pixels
by means of a simple test based on a ﬁxed NTI
threshold:
NTIPIX . K1
(Test 1)
where NTIPIX is the NTI pixel value and K1 is the
threshold. The K1 values are the same for the two
analysed ROIs, but are distinct for night-time and
daytime data (see Table 1). Their values have been
settled according to the global application and vali-
dation of the NTI thresholds within the MODVOLC
algorithm (Wright et al. 2002).
Pixels that satisfy Test 1 are ﬂagged as ‘active’
and subsequently discarded (unsuitable) for further
steps.
Contextual thresholds for dNTI and dETI
matrices
Step 4 consists of two tests (applied to the dNTI and
dETI matrices, respectively) that must be satisﬁed at
Fig. 2. (a) Relationship between NTI (equation 1) and NTIapp (equation 3) for a night-time image acquired of Mt
Etna on 25 July 2012 at 00:40 (UTC). A best-ﬁt quadratic regression is used to calculate NTIbk, the relationship of
which with NTI is shown in (b). In (c) & (d), the same relationships between NTI, NTIapp and NTIbk are shown for
a daytime image acquired of Mt Etna on 7 November 2013 at 09:45 (UTC). Note how the hotspot-contaminated
pixels clearly deviate from the 1:1 ratio illustrated in (b) & (d).
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 7 =====
the same time for each pixel. Hence, a pixel is
ﬂagged as ‘active’ when:
dNTIPIX . C1
or
dNTIPIX . mdNTI + C2sdNTI
(Test 2)
and
dETIPIX . C1
or
dETIPIX . mdETI + C2sdETI
(Test 3)
where the subscript PIX refers to the value of the
analysed pixel, C1 and C2 are constants, and m and
s are the arithmetic mean and standard deviation
of all the suitable pixels within the image.
In the case of very homogeneous scenes (i.e. in
the absence of clouds and over homogeneous
terrain), the parameter C1 implies that a minimum
threshold (for both dNTI and dETI) needs to be
exceeded in order to ﬂag a pixel as ‘active’ (see
Table 1). However, when highly variable scenes
are analysed, the detection of clear positive outliers
(hotspots) is achieved using statistical analysis of
the whole scene (mean (m) and standard deviation
(s) for all the suitable pixels). Notably, the C1 and
C2 values are different for two distinct ROIs
(because of variable size and different chance of
ﬁnding a thermal anomaly in the two regions), as
well as for night-time and daytime data (because
solar effects amplify the variability in NTI and ETI
matrices in daytime data). The values of the above
parameters used in the current version of the algor-
ithm are listed in Table 1.
In addition, pixels ﬂagged as ‘active’ by means
of tests 2 and 3 are subsequently eliminated from
further analysis.
Second run
The last step is applied only if one or more pixels
have been detected by the previous tests, and
focuses on reﬁning the hotspot detection for the
pixels adjacent to those already ﬂagged. This is
Fig. 3. Sequence of thermal indexes (a) NTI, (b) NTIbk and (c) ETI, obtained for the night-time image acquired on
Mt Etna on 25 July 2012. The ETI clearly enhances the presence of hotspots at the summit of the volcano. The
same indexes, relative to the daytime image acquired on 7 November 2013, are shown in (d), (e) and (f). The colourscale
is the same for NTI and NTIbk images, in order to show the consistency of these indexes in the absence of hotspot(s).
Table 1. Parameters used in the MIROVA algorithm
Parameter
Night-time
Daytime
ROI1
ROI2
ROI1
ROI2
K1
20.8
20.8
20.6
20.6
C1
0.003
0.01
0.02
0.02
C2
5
10
15
15
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 8 =====
necessary since ‘active’ pixels may strongly modify
the average values of their surroundings, with a con-
sequent decrease in the dNTI and dETI values of
adjacent pixels (e.g. see the black pixels in Fig. 4).
To avoid this problem, step 2 (spatial analysis) is
performed a second time, being particularly care-
ful to eliminate all of the ‘active’ pixels already
detected. Hence, the previous step (contextual
threshold: tests 2 and 3) are applied again to the
new dNTI and dETI matrices.
It is important to outline that in all of the steps
described above we are not interested in discrimi-
nating cloudy pixels, but only in detecting pixels
were two indexes are ‘anomalously high’ with
respect to their surroundings. The basic idea is that
after performing the spectral ﬁlter (NTI and ETI
indexes), the detection of a hotspot simply requires
the ‘spatial’ variability of the above indexes that
characterize the analysed scene (on a statistical
basis). Note the latter is independent of the absolute
values of the indexes themselves, and is calculated
case by case (tests 2 and 3). A statistical analysis
is thus performed to identify the clear outliers. It
has been found that the parameters given in
Table 1 bring out this natural variability, whatever
the surface type sampled by each pixel.
‘Excess’ MIR radiance and
radiative power
Once a pixel is ﬂagged as active, the ‘above back-
ground’ at 4 mm radiance (DL4PIX) is calculated as:
DL4PIX = L4alert −L4bk
(6)
where L4alert is the 4 mm radiance of the alerted
pixel/s and L4bk is the background radiance at
4 mm. L4bk is estimated from the arithmetic mean
of all the pixels surrounding the active one (or
around the active cluster).
In performing this calculation some error in L4bk
might be introduced by the presence of clouds (see
the section on ‘Limits and uncertainty of the data
provided by the MIROVA system’). However, a
visual inspection of the images allows the quality
of each acquisition to be assessed, and cloud-
affected data to be discarded (a posteriori).
Following Wooster et al. (2003), we calculated
the radiative power (RP in W) by means of the
MIR method. Hence, for an individual alerted
pixel, the RPPIX is calculated as:
RPPIX = 18.9 × APIX × DL4PIX
(7)
Fig. 4. Flow chart of the spectral (a) and spatial (b) principles applied to the night-time image acquired of Mt Etna
on 25 July 2012, during small lava outﬂow within the Bocca Nuova crater. Once the NTI and ETI indexes are calculated,
the spatial analysis is used to identify pixels having values higher than the surroundings. Black pixels on the dNTI
and dETI images correspond to pixels ﬂagged as ‘active’ during the ﬁrst run of the algorithm. The total active pixels
(ﬁrst and second runs) are shown in the alert mask. See the text for further details.
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 9 =====
where APIX is the pixel size (1 km2 for the resampled
MODIS pixels).
When two or more pixels (a cluster of pix-
els) are alerted, the total radiative power is calcu-
lated as being the sum of the single RPPIX, so
that:
RP =

n alert
1
RPPIX
(8)
where ‘n alert’ is the number of alerted pixels.
Performance and exportability
The effectiveness of the detection (omission v. false
alerts) is essentially controlled by the values of
parameters K1, C1 and C2. In particular, parameter
C2 deﬁnes the number of standard deviations (s)
used to identify the outliers in each ROI. For exam-
ple, the visual inspection of night-time images col-
lected on Etna during 2006 reveals that a value of
C2 ≥10 will efﬁciently avoid false detections but
will cause the omission of more than 25% of the
small alerts (,10 MW). Conversely, a very low
value of C2 (i.e. C2 ≤3) will only lose 7% of
the small alerts, at the expense of more than 7%
false detections.
Based on several runs on the Stromboli and Mt
Etna data sets (more than 20 000 images), we estab-
lished that the values shown in Table 1 produce
excellent results in terms of algorithm perfor-
mance and provide the best compromise between
omitted (c. 10%) and false (c. 5%) detections. These
results are in excellent agreement with those
obtained using an adapted threshold procedure
(Coppola et al. 2014), and support the efﬁciency
of the MIROVA system in tracking small thermal
anomalies.
However, we must highlight that the values pre-
sented in Table 1 simply describe the natural varia-
bility of dNTI and dETI, and provide self-adapting
thresholds for each analysed scene ‘independent’ of
the local conditions (climate, temperature and topo-
graphy). In addition to Stromboli and Mt Etna,
our preliminary tests in other volcanic contexts (see
Appendix A) clearly suggest that the MIROVA
algorithm can easily be applied over a wide range
of environmental conditions without the need to
process historical archives. We recognize that a
global validation of the algorithm would require a
complete examination of all environmental, topo-
graphical and climatic conditions. However, sam-
pling suggests that the parameters listed in Table 1
may also be applied to other volcanoes to track vol-
canic hotspots (by using the same spatial grid and
ROIs).
Results: radiative power emitted by
Stromboli and Mt Etna during the
2000–13 period
The radiative power (RP) recorded at Stromboli
and Mt Etna during the 2000–13 time span is
shown in Figure 5. In order to display the high
number of detections, ranging from 1 MW to more
than 10 GW, we plotted both of the time series on
a logarithmic scale.
At Stromboli volcano, the MIROVA system
detected 2063 alerts over a total of 20 494 MODIS
overpasses between 2000 and 2013 (c. 10.1%).
The RP ranged from 1 MW to a maximum of
around 3.83 GW detected on 28 December 2002 at
21:15 (UTC) during the initial phase of the 2002–
03 effusive eruption (Calvari et al. 2005).
At Mt Etna, the MIROVA system detected 5197
alerts over a total of 20 090 MODIS overpasses ana-
lysed between 2000 and 2013 (c. 25.9%). The RP
ranged from 1 MW to approximately 24.3 GW,
with an arithmetic mean of 379.7 MW. The maxi-
mum RP (c. 24.3 GW) was detected on 4 March
2012 at 09:10 (UTC), corresponding to a powerful
fountaining episode of Mt Etna that started at 07:00
(UTC) on the same day (Behncke et al. 2014).
An exhaustive description of the whole time
series presented in Figure 5 lies outside the goal
of this work. Instead, we focus here on speciﬁc
results obtained from the above data sets, concern-
ing detection, monitoring and modelling of effusive
activity at the Stromboli and Mt Etna volcanoes.
These basic ﬁndings refer to: (i) the detection of
magma ascent before effusive eruptions; (ii) the
tracking of the initial advance of kilometre-long lava
ﬂows; (iii) the recognition of an effusive trend
during ongoing eruption; (iv) the detection of lava-
ﬂow cooling processes; and, lastly, (v) the estima-
tion of time-averaged lava discharge rates (TADRs)
and cumulative volumes.
Detection of magma ascent before effusive
eruptions
At open-conduit volcanoes, the rise of magma may
produce variations in the thermal output detectable
from space. For example, it has been shown that
the radiative power measured at Stromboli vol-
cano is strongly linked to the height of the magmatic
column feeding the activity at the surface (Coppola
et al. 2013). In particular, it has been inferred that
an empirical threshold of 30–50 MW (2002–03
and 2007) marks the transition between Strombo-
lian and effusive activity, a condition that was
reached during the two major effusive eruptions
(2002–03 and 2007), and during several episodes
of summit overﬂows observed between 2008 and
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 10 =====
2013 (cf. Coppola et al. 2012, 2014). In some cases,
changes in the eruption style were preceded by
a gradual increase in thermal output, and also in
other geophysical (seismicity, deformation and
infrasound: e.g. Ripepe et al. 2009) and geochem-
ical parameters (Aiuppa et al. 2009; Inguaggiato
et al. 2011; Cigolini et al. 2013). This increase
was interpreted as being due to the gradual ascent
of the magma column feeding the summit vents
(Coppola et al. 2012). For instance, several changes
were observed a few months before the onset of the
2007 eruption (Fig. 6a). In fact, the RP increased
from less than 5 MW (October–December 2006)
to more than 10 MW at the beginning of February
2007, and reached more than 50 MW on 20 Febru-
ary 2007, just 7 days before the onset of the major
eruption (Fig. 6a). In a similar manner, during Feb-
ruary–April 2009, the increase in RP tracked the
uprising of Stromboli’s magma column that culmi-
nated with several episodes of intracrater overﬂows
during late April and May 2009 (Global Volcanism
Program 2010) (Fig. 6b).
Although not all of the effusive eruptions are
necessarily preceded by this kind of activity, the
occurrence of the cited processes show how the
thermal data recorded by MIROVA may be used
for assessing magma column ascent (especially at
open-vent volcanoes) and provide ‘early warnings’
for the onset of effusive activity and/or major
changes in the eruption style.
Tracking the initial advance of
long lava ﬂows
Takagi & Huppert (2010) suggested that monitoring
the length and volume of an active ﬂow is essential
for estimating its evolving viscosity and for predict-
ing the further advance of the ﬂow front. However, a
systematic record of these data during the initial
Fig. 5. Long-term RP time series (log-scale) for (a) Stromboli and (b) Etna retrieved using the MIROVA algorithm.
Grey ﬁelds outline the periods of persistent effusive activity. Note the long decreasing RP tail (due to lava-ﬂow cooling)
after the end of the effusive periods at Mt Etna.
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 11 =====
stage of effusive eruptions is not always possible
and is often problematic, especially when the lava
emplacement takes place within poorly accessible
areas. In this regard, the data set processed automati-
cally by MIROVA does make this possible, allow-
ing the initial advancement of long lava ﬂows (i.e.
during the ﬁrst days of emplacement) to be
tracked by using the MODIS-derived NTI maps.
As an example, we show the results obtained for
two lava ﬂows that formed at Mt Etna on 2001
and 2002 in Figure 7. The ﬁrst lava ﬂow was
emplaced on the south ﬂank during the 2001 erup-
tion and is the longer ﬂow unit described by Coltelli
et al. (2007) (LFS1 unit: Fig. 7a). The second ﬂow
was active during the ﬁrst days of the 2002 eruption
and represents the main lava ﬂow that emplaced
onto the northern ﬂank of Mt Etna during late
October 2002 (Castruccio et al. 2014) (Fig. 7b).
Both of these lava ﬂows advanced rapidly during
the ﬁrst days of activity, and extended downhill
for 6–7 km from the feeding vents (cf. Coltelli
et al. 2007; Castruccio et al. 2014).
The ﬂow-front position has been determined
using NTI maps, available in .kmz format (see the
next section), which allows the hotspot pixels to
be projected onto Google Earth (GE) images, as
shown in Figure 7a, c. Then, by using the GE ruler
tool, we measured the approximate distance (+1 km)
between the main vent (whose location must be
known a priori) and the centre of the furthermost
alerted pixel. This procedure, applied to a series of
selected NTI maps, allowed us to reconstruct the
MODIS-derived lava-ﬂow’s lengthening, which is
compared with ﬁeld observations in Figure 7b,
d. The excellent agreement with ﬁeld data suggests
that the initial advance of these relatively long lava
ﬂows has been efﬁciently tracked using MODIS
data processed by MIROVA. We must note that
the application of our method is constrained by the
extension of the lava ﬂows (that must be longer
than 1–2 km), as well as by the satellite-bearing
viewing
geometry
(the
images
acquired
with
higher zenith angles should be excluded) and by
the availability of cloud-free data (a least over the
ﬂow front). However, our results suggest that, in
the absence of direct ﬁeld observations, the MODIS-
derived NTI maps can provide crucial information
about ﬂow-front position and advancement velocity.
The availability of this kind of data in near-real time
may help to assess the risks posed by a further
advancement of the lava ﬂow and, together with
effusion rate estimates, may be crucial for improv-
ing numerical models that predict lava-ﬂow paths.
Effusive trend during ongoing eruptions
Identifying the trend of an ongoing eruption is very
important in terms of volcano surveillance and risk
assessment. Although the effusive dynamic may
change suddenly (within a few minutes), the detec-
tion of the effusive trend gives indications about the
general tendency of an ongoing effusion (i.e.
waning, rising, steady or pulsatory) and may help
evaluate eruptive scenarios and forecast future
changes in the eruptive activity. In addition,
mid-term (i.e. daily or weekly) and/or long-term
(monthly–yearly)
effusive
trends
have
been
proved to be essential in understanding the eruptive
dynamics and associated processes (Wadge 1981;
Harris et al. 2000).
As detailed in the next section, the RP time series
may be regarded as a thermal proxy for effusive
Fig. 6. Example of selected RP time series retrieved using the MIROVA algorithm at Stromboli volcano. Both time
series show a month-long increase in RP (outlined by the dashed line) that culminated in the effusive ﬂank eruptions of
February 2007 (a), and a period of recurrent summit overﬂows in April–May 2009 (b). Note how the empirical
threshold of 30–50 MW (regarded as the transitional regime: Coppola et al. 2012, 2014) marks the transition from
Strombolian (white ﬁeld) to effusive activity (grey ﬁeld).
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 12 =====
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 13 =====
activity. An overview of some particular trends
recorded at Mt Etna and Stromboli is given in
Figure 8, where we plot the RP time series relative
to the 2002–03 (Fig. 8a), the 2006 (Fig. 8b) and
the 2008–09 (Fig. 8c) eruptions of Mt Etna, together
with the 2002–03 eruption of Stromboli (Fig. 8d).
Harris et al. (2011) identiﬁed distinct effusive
trends at Mt Etna, each one reﬂecting speciﬁc erup-
tive dynamics (or processes). Accordingly, waning
trends observed during the 2002–03 eruption (Fig.
8a) are probably associated with the draining of a
pressurized magmatic system. Conversely, increas-
ing effusive activity, such as that observed during
the 2006 eruption (Fig. 8b), was interpreted as the
result of ‘the ascent of a magma batch which
pushes a volume of degassed magma ahead of it’
(Harris et al. 2011, p. 5). However, the second half
of the 2008–09 eruption of Mt Etna (i.e. from
October 2008 to April 2009: Fig. 8c) showed a
remarkably steady trend typical of stable effusion
of lava at the same rate at which the magma is sup-
plied (Harris & Neri 2002).
The trend observed during the 2002–03 erup-
tion of Stromboli seems to be more complex, being
characterized by a pulsatory behaviour with four
consecutive phases, lasting 1–2 months each (Fig.
8d). According to Coppola et al. (2012), this trend
could reﬂect cyclic pressurization of the magma
column or local variations in magma compressibil-
ity within the conduit (e.g. Cigolini et al. 2015).
Fig. 7. (a) Details of the NTI map, acquired on 22 July 2001, plotted onto Google Earth images. The contour on the
northern lava ﬂow is marked by the white line. The red line represents the proﬁle from which the ﬂow-front position is
calculated (white arrow). (b) Lava-ﬂow lengths (distance from the vent) obtained from a sequence of MODIS images
(red squares) compared with ﬁeld observations (black circles: from Coltelli et al. 2007). (c) NTI image acquired on 29
October 2002 and (d) MODIS-derived ﬂow lengths (red squares) compared with ﬁeld data (black circles; from
Castruccio et al. 2014, modiﬁed). The mean error bar for MODIS-derived measurements is 1 km.
Fig. 8. Four examples of effusive trends that characterized the recent activity of Etna and Stromboli. (a) Waxing–
waning trend reﬂecting the tapping of a pressurized volume during the 2002–03 eruption of Mt Etna. (b) Increasing
trend associated with the ascent of a magma batch during the 2006 eruption of Mt Etna. (c) Stable trend at Mt Etna
(between October 2008 and April 2009) probably associated with steady effusion of lava. (d) Oscillating trend observed
during the 2002–03 eruption of Stromboli, possibly associated with cyclic pressurization of the magma column. See the
text for details.
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 14 =====
As argued by Harris et al. (2011), the availability
of a long-term data set of satellite-derived time
series may be used to build up a resource record of
effusive trends. Besides being useful for decoding
the eruptive processes at the onset and during the
evolution of volcanic activity, we suggest that a
well-organized and parameterized database of the
effusive trends provides a major contribution for
improving the understanding of eruption dynamics
and related processes.
Lava-ﬂow cooling
The cooling of lava ﬂows may produce middle infra-
red radiation (MIR), which is still detectable by sat-
ellites (Aries et al. 2001; Patrick et al. 2003;
Coppola & Cigolini 2013). In the examples shown
in Figure 9, the RP values recorded at Mt Etna
after the end of the 2002–03 and 2004–05 eruptions
show a slow but clear decrease of the thermal output
associated with the cooling of the associated lava
ﬂows. These declining trends were recorded for
several months after the end of the effusions (28
January 2003 and 8 March 2005, respectively:
Andronico et al. 2005; Neri & Acocella 2006),
which, in our dataset, is marked by a sudden
‘crash’ in the radiative power (Fig. 9).
Notably, these two eruptions were different in
character (Allard et al. 2006) and produced lava-
ﬂow ﬁelds with volumes of 33–50 and 40–
64 Mm3 for the 2002–03 and the 2004–05 erup-
tions, respectively (Andronico et al. 2005; Neri &
Acocella 2006; Harris et al. 2011). The two effusive
events produced ﬂow ﬁelds remarkably different in
terms of location and morphometry. In fact, the
2002–03 eruption produced distinct lava-ﬂow
units on the north and south ﬂanks, covering a
total area of about 5 km2 (Andronico et al. 2005),
while the 2004–05 eruption emplaced a massive,
compound lava ﬁeld within the Valle del Bove,
which covered an area of only 2.3 km2 (Neri & Aco-
cella 2006). Hence, the two events produced lava-
ﬂow ﬁelds with very different areas (cf. ﬁg. 1 in
Allard et al. 2006) and thicknesses.
Previous studies have shown that the duration
of the cooling curve and its integrated thermal
energy can be correlated with the volume or thick-
ness of the observed lava ﬂows (Gouhier et al.
2012; Ganci et al. 2012a; Coppola et al. 2013). For
example, Gouhier et al. (2012) proposed a method
to estimate lava-ﬂow volume based on the cooling
curves recorded by the SEVIRI sensor after a parox-
ysmal event at Mt Etna. Likewise, Coppola & Cigo-
lini (2013) showed that the duration of the cooling
regime, observed via MODIS IR data at Nyamura-
gira volcano, was correlated with the volumes and
thicknesses of the associated lava ﬂows.
Hence, the curves shown in Figure 9 probably
record the cooling process of these two different
ﬂow ﬁelds, with the longer and more energetic
cooling curve associated with the thicker lava
body emplaced within the Valle del Bove during
the 2004–05 eruption.
Future investigations will be better able to char-
acterize the cooling curves provided by MIROVA
in terms of lava ﬁeld volume and thickness, thus
offering an additional tool to reﬁne these parameters
from remote-sensing data.
Time-averaged lava discharge rate (TADR)
and cumulative volumes
During
effusive
eruptions,
thermal
remote-
sensing data can be converted into estimates of
Fig. 9. Selected frames of the RP time series retrieved using the MIROVA algorithm during the cooling phase of (a) the
2002–03 lava ﬂows, and (b) the 2004–05 lava ﬂows. The differences in the cooling curves are probably due to the
different thicknesses of the associated ﬂow ﬁelds. Isolated spikes are due to the detection of ﬁres around Mt Etna during
the hot season (July–September).
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 15 =====
time-averaged lava discharge rates (TADR). Since
the original heat budget approach of Pieri & Baloga
(1986), alternative and more detailed methods have
been developed and debated in recent years (e.g.
Harris et al. 1998; Wright et al. 2001; Harris &
Baloga 2009), all converging towards a general cor-
relation between radiative heat power and volu-
metric ﬂux(es) (Garel et al. 2012, 2014).
Here we use the radiant density approach
(Coppola et al. 2012), where TADR (m3 s1) can be
directly related to the RP (W) estimated from the
MIR method, through a unique best-ﬁt coefﬁcient
deﬁned as ‘radiant density’ (crad):
TADR = RP
crad
(9)
where, for a given discharge rate, the radiant density
crad (J m23) expresses the efﬁciency of the lava
body to modulate the heat radiated from the active
surface (see Coppola et al. 2012).
The recent eruptions of Mt Etna were character-
ized by insulation, rheological and topographical
conditions, which, according to Coppola et al.
(2012), produced a limited range of radiant den-
sities, spanning from 2 × 108 to 3.6 × 108 J m23.
Hence, by using this range of crad, equation (9) can
be directly applied to the RP recorded by MIROVA
in order to obtain a maximum and minimum esti-
mate of TADR for each image analysed.
In Figure 10a, we plotted the TADR obtained for
the 2008–09 eruption (minimum and maximum
values). Note that we plotted all of the data obtained
by the RP time series (Fig. 5), thus including cloudy
data that clearly produce an underestimated TADR.
Therefore, the time series showed in Figure 10a
must be interpreted in terms of a general trend
since individual data points may be affected by the
presence of clouds. This issue is of primary impor-
tance during near-real-time data delivery, and a
human-based or computer-based procedure should
be carried out in order to assess the quality of each
image (Zaksˇek et al. 2013). In addition, as this
also affects the calculation of erupted volumes, bad-
quality data must be excluded from the integration
of the TADR time series. To simplify this prob-
lem, we consider here the highest TADR recorded
during a 24 h time window as being the most repre-
sentative value for the daily eruption rate. Hence,
the cumulative volume of erupted lava is calcu-
lated by integrating the daily TADR, as shown in
Figure 10b. In the case of the 2008–09 eruption,
this calculation yields a total erupted volume of
64 + 18 Mm3, which is in excellent agreement
with independent measurements of 70 + 20 Mm3
(Harris et al. 2011; Corsaro & Miraglia 2014).
Similarly, the total calculated volume of erupted
lava between 2000 and 2014 amounted to 344 +
98 Mm3, giving a mean output rate (MOR) of
0.80 + 0.17 m3 s21 (Fig. 10b). The excellent agree-
ment of our output rate with that estimated by
Harris et al. (2011) for between 1980 and 2010
(0.8 m3 s21) highlights the efﬁciency of the radi-
ant density approach in estimating TADR and
erupted volumes at effusive volcanoes.
Near-real-time implementation
(MIROVA-NRT)
Near-real-time processing is achieved by using
MODIS-NRT products distributed by the LANCE-
Fig. 10. (a) TADR time series relative to the 2008–09 eruption of Mt Etna. Grey and black stems refer to the minimum
and maximum estimates. (b) Cumulative volume (median, maximum and minimum estimates) of lava erupted at
Mt Etna between 2000 and 2013. The mean output rate for the median estimate is 0.80 m3s21, in agreement with the
30 year-long value estimated for 1980–2010 (Harris et al. 2011).
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 16 =====
MODIS
system
(http://lance-modis.eosdis.nasa.
gov/) that delivers Level 1 granules within 3 h of
real time. These data are stored in a rolling archive
for 7 days and are available for distribution by direct
access to the ﬁle transfer protocol (FTP) sites.
The MIROVA-NRT system scans the LANCE ftp
site every 5 min looking for the new granules that
contain the target volcano. Once a new granule is
found, it is downloaded and stored onto a local
hard drive. Depending on the connection speed, this
step requires 1–15 min. The new image is automati-
cally processed by the algorithm, following the pro-
cedure described in the section on ‘The MIROVA
system’, which requires a few additional minutes
for graphical outputs to be generated and posted
onto the MIROVA website (www.mirova.unito.it).
Overall, the MIROVA-NRT system enables the pro-
duction of updated NTI maps (including .kmz
format for Google Earth use) and RP time series
within 1–4 h of a satellite overpass. An example
of the graphical output automatically posted on the
cited website is shown here as Figure 11
As described in the sections on ‘The MIROVA
system’ and ‘Performances and exportability’, the
MIROVA algorithm is completely autonomous
and does not require historical (temporal) analysis
in order to retrieve the appropriate thresholds.
Hence, the whole processing scheme is easily expor-
table to several target volcanoes that cover a wide
range of local and climatic conditions (see Appen-
dix A).
The system is currently running in near-real time
for several volcanoes (Campi Flegrei, Vesuvius,
Stromboli, Vulcano and Mt Etna) and it is scheduled
to be extended to several other targets in the near
future.
Limits and uncertainty of the data provided
by the MIROVA system
A number of issues must be taken into account when
using the data automatically provided by MIROVA.
These concern the limits and uncertainty of the data
as summarized below:
False alerts
A limited number of false alerts may be detected by
the algorithm. These principally occur on daytime
Fig. 11. A selected example of RP time series for Mt Etna automatically posted at the MIROVA website (www.mirova.
unito.it). On (a) the last NTI map is displayed with relative RP, satellite zenith and azimuth data displayed. RP time
series (log scale) relative to the last month (b) and last year (c). The colour of the thermal anomaly box (upper right) is
automatically set according to the radiative power scale (Low ,1 MW; Moderate 1–10 MW; High 10–100 MW; Very
High 100–1000 MW; Extreme 1000–10 000 MW).
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 17 =====
images and are associated with high NTI contrasts at
the edge of water bodies, as well as within scattered
clouds. However, these false detections typically
radiate less than 5 MW and can be easily identiﬁed
by a visual inspection of the associated NTI map. As
discussed previously, reducing the false detection
rate will cause numerous genuine alerts of low
intensity (,10 MW) to be missed.
Fires and anthropogenic heat sources
Fires and/or high-temperature anthropogenic heat
sources may trigger the automatic detection of hot-
spots. These non-volcanic thermal anomalies have
similar thermal signatures to volcanic hotspots and
cannot be distinguished from genuine volcanic
activity. Although they typically occur in vegetated
or urban areas located at some kilometres from the
volcano summit, the occurrence of distal volcanic
activity (i.e. eccentric vents) cannot be ruled out a
priori. Thus, the time series automatically provided
by MIROVA might include these non-volcanic
thermal anomalies. However, they can be identiﬁed
during post-analysis (Fig. 9).
Metereological and volcanic clouds
As discussed previously, meteorological and volca-
nic clouds may prevent the detection of hotspots or
affect the associated thermal anomaly. Clouds may
also affect the L4bk estimation, especially when
they completely surround the active pixel(s).
However, there is, as yet, no robust method to evalu-
ate the amount of thermal radiation attenuated by
clouds, or volcanic plumes, so that visual inspection
of the image still remains the best solution to assess
the quality of each image. Hence, the RP time series
obtained by MIROVA are provided ‘as they are’ and
may be affected by the presence of meteorological
and/or volcanic clouds.
Satellite viewing geometry
The satellite viewing geometry (i.e. high satellite
zenith) must also be taken into account when inter-
preting the MIROVA data. Images acquired with a
high zenith angle (c. 69% of the data have a satellite
zenith .308) may not detect hotspots located in
deep craters or positioned at the base of steep
crater rims. In addition, high scan angles produce
a strong deformation of the projected thermal
anomalies. This is accompanied by a decrease in
the accuracy of the pixel(s) geolocation and thus
of related hotspot(s). In these cases, spatial measure-
ments of the thermal anomaly (such as those illus-
trated in Fig. 7) may have large errors (up to
several kilometres) and are not recommended.
Radiative power uncertainty
The radiative power calculated by MIROVA is
obtained using the MIR method (Wooster et al.
2003). The authors state that when the hot emitter
has an integrated temperature higher than 600K
(which applies to most active lava surfaces: cf.
Wright et al. 2010) this method provides RP esti-
mates with an uncertainty of +30%. However, in
the case of cooler lava bodies (i.e. cryptodomes),
the RP calculated using the MIR method provides
only a minimum value for the whole thermal
output, and is more likely to represent the heat
radiated by the most active portion of the lava body.
The time-averaged lava discharge rates issue
Although the TADRs obtained using the radiant
density approach has been proved to be efﬁcient in
tracking the effusive trend and cumulated volumes
during long-lived eruptions (see the section on
‘Time-averaged lava discharge rate (TADR) and
cumulative volumes’), some caution must be used
for its general application. The linear relationship
between RP and TADR (which is the fundamen-
tal assumption of the radiant density approach)
becomes valid after a certain ‘transient time’ dur-
ing which the surface thermal structure becomes
steady (Garel et al. 2012). This makes the TADR
estimated using the radiant density approach less
reliable during sharp variations of the effusion
rate, such as short-lived fountaining events. In addi-
tion, in order to set a plausible range of radiant den-
sities, some constraints about the active lava body
(i.e. lava composition) creating the heat ﬂux
measured by MIROVA must be known a priori
(Coppola et al. 2013). All these issues make the
estimation of the TADR a complex evaluation,
especially on poorly studied volcanoes.
Conclusions
We have here presented a new hotspot detection
system (MIROVA) based on the analysis of
MODIS IR data. The algorithm is characterized by
spectral and spatial principles that do not require
the analysis of a historical data set, thus making
the system extremely ﬂexible and easily exportable
to a large number of target volcanoes.
The long-term data set recorded at Stromboli and
Mt Etna volcanoes has been used to show what kind
of information the MIROVA system may provide in
order to track effusive activity. The principal out-
comes are:
† The detection of small thermal anomalies
(,10 MW) may allow the tracking of small
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 18 =====
variations in thermal output related to magma
ascent prior to the onset of effusive activity.
† The initial advance of major lava ﬂows (.2–
3 km) can be tracked by using near-real-time
NTI maps.
† When properly calibrated, the radiant density
approach allows the thermal output to be con-
verted into lava discharge rates and erupted
volumes, with a reasonable degree of uncertainty
(+30%).
† Middle- and long-term time series enable the
interpretation of ongoing effusive trends (e.g.
waning; waxing, steady and pulsatory).
† The detection of the cooling curve after major
effusive eruptions provides an opportunity to
reﬁne volumes and thicknesses of the related
ﬂow ﬁelds.
Lastly, we described how the whole hotspot detec-
tion
system
has
been
implemented
within
a
near-real-time processing scheme. Near-real-time
observation is currently operational for ﬁve Italian
volcanoes (listed in the previous section), thus pro-
viding updated NTI maps and the RP time series
within 1–4 h of the image acquisition (www.
mirova.unito.it). In addition to the above-mentioned
volcanoes, the system is currently being tested for
several others volcanoes (unpublished data), the
near-real-time observation of which is scheduled
to become operational in the next few months.
Thus, although it has not been designed for global
monitoring, the MIROVA system has the potential
to monitor, in near-real time, any sector of the
globe within only a few hours. This provides a
useful option for monitoring volcanic activity in
any remote region not covered by conventional or
ad hoc thermal monitoring systems.
We thank the Editor and two anonymous reviewers for
their constructive comments that strongly improved this
work. This research has beneﬁted from funding provided
by the Italian Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri, Dipar-
timento della Protezione Civile (DPC) as part of the
DEVnet Programme that includes a collaborative project
between the Earth Sciences departments of the University
of Florence and the University of Torino. This research
was partially supported by the Italian Ministry for Uni-
versities and Research (MIUR). We thank the CRT
Foundation for supporting the improvement of our comput-
ing system at the Department of Earth Science of Turin.
We acknowledge the LANCE-MODIS system (http://
lance-modis.eosdis.nasa.gov/) for providing Level 1B
MODIS data in near-real time. The digital elevation mod-
els (DEMs) used for the contour lines are courtesy of
CGIAR (srtm.csi.cgiar.org). Scientiﬁc papers funded by
DPC do not represent its ofﬁcial opinion and policies.
Appendix A
Here we provide a series of ﬁgures (Figs A1–A9) showing
the application of the MIROVA algorithm in various vol-
canic contexts and under different climatic conditions.
Fig. A1. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired over Bezymianny volcano
(Kamchatcka) on 8 January 2012. TIR temperatures in this scene range from 231 to 249K. However, the high contrast of
the ‘active’ pixels at the summit of the volcano with the surroundings makes the spatial ﬁltering (dNTI and dETI)
extremely efﬁcient in the detection of the hotspot(s).
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 19 =====
Fig. A2. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired over Eyjafjallajo¨kull volcano
(Iceland: 1666 m above sea level (asl)) on 7 April 2010. TIR temperatures in this scene range from 256 to 278K. The
coast line on the south produces a moderate increase in dNTI and dETI: However, ‘active’ pixels due to volcanic activity
are the only outliers that trigger the detection of the hotspot(s).
Fig. A3. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired at Erta-Ale volcano (Ethiopia:
613 m above sea level (asl)) on 16 August 2009. Maximum TIR temperature reached 305K but the thermal indexes
clearly isolated the lava-lake-induced thermal anomaly.
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 20 =====
Fig. A4. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired at Dubbi volcano (Eritrea: 1625 m
above sea level (asl)) on 3 July 2013. Maximum TIR temperature reached 302K. Despite the contrasting background and
thermal indexes, there are no outliers that pass the algorithm test. No thermal anomalies are detected.
Fig. A5. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired for Ubinas volcano (Peru) on 3
April 2008. The clear thermal gradient between the summit of the volcano (5672 m above sea level (asl)) and the bottom
of the Tambo River Valley (on the right of each image: 2500 m above sea level (asl)) is strongly reduced by performing
the spatial ﬁlters (dNTI and dETI). The very small thermal anomaly (NTI ,20.91) at the summit of Ubinas appears well
contrasted with respect to the surroundings showing the highest thermal indexes.
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 21 =====
Fig. A6. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloud-free’ image acquired Villarrica volcano (Chile) on 24
June 2009. The clear thermal contrast between the ice-covered summit of the volcano (2847 m above sea level (asl)) and
the Villarrica lake (on the top left of each image; 215 m asl) is clearly visible on the NTI and NTIbk. However, a very
small thermal anomaly (NTI ,20.93) at the summit of Villarrica is easily detected after performing the spatial ﬁltering
(dNTI and dETI). Note how the warm lake surface almost disappears in the ETI map
Fig. A7. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘cloudy’ image acquired over Tolbachik volcano (Kamchatcka:
3611 m above sea level (asl)) on 20 November 2012. In this image, cloudy conditions prevent a clear view of Tolbachik
volcano and its surroundings. Although the NTI and the ETI are not uniform within the acquired scene, their spatial
variability (dNTI and dETI) is not sufﬁcient to trigger an alert.
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 22 =====
Fig. A8. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘partially cloudy’ image acquired on Etna volcano (Italy:
3330 m above sea level (asl)) on 8 February 2010. Note how the cold clouds approaching the summit of the volcano did
not prevent the detection of a very small thermal anomaly (NTI ,20.9).
Fig. A9. Thermal indexes and alert mask retrieved for a ‘partially cloudy’ image acquired over Stromboli volcano
(Italy: 924 m above sea level (asl)) on 19 January 2010. The presence of scattered clouds produces a heterogeneous
scene that increase the spatial variability of the thermal indexes (dNTI and dETI). However, there are no clear outliers in
the dNTI and dETI indexes so that no hotspot is detected in this scene.
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 23 =====
References
Aiuppa, A., Federico, C. et al. 2009. The 2007 eruption
of Stromboli volcano: insights from real-time measure-
ment of the volcanic gas plume CO2/SO2 ratio.
Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research,
182, 221–230.
Allard, P., Behncke, B., D’Amico, S., Neri, M. &
Gambino, S. 2006. Mount Etna 1993–2005: anatomy
of an evolving eruptive cycle. Earth Science Reviews,
78, 85–114.
Andronico, D., Branca, S.
et al. 2005. A multi-
disciplinary study of the 2002–03 Etna eruption:
insights into a complex plumbing system. Bulletin of
Volcanology, 67, 314–330.
Aries, S. A., Harris, A. J. L. & Rothery, D. A. 2001.
Remote infrared detection of the cessation of vol-
canic eruptions. Geophysical Research Letters, 28,
1803–1807.
Baxter, P. J. 2011. Volcanoes and human health. In:
Reference Module in Earth Systems and Environ-
mental Sciences, from Encyclopedia of Environmental
Health. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 672–680, http://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52272-6.00666-8
Behncke, B., Branca, S., Corsaro, R. A., De Beni, E.,
Miraglia, L. & Proietti, C. 2014. The 2011–2012
summit activity of Mount Etna: birth, growth and pro-
ducts of the new SE crater. Journal of Volcanology and
Geothermal Research, 270, 10–21.
Calvari, S., Spampinato, L. et al. 2005. Chronology
and complex volcanic processes during the 2002–
2003 ﬂank eruption at Stromboli volcano (Italy) recon-
structed from direct observations and surveys with
a handheld thermal camera. Journal of Geophysi-
cal Research, 110, B02201, http://doi.org/10.1029/
2004JB003129
Castruccio, A., Rust, A. C. & Sparks, R. S. J. 2014.
Assessing lava ﬂow evolution from post-eruption
ﬁeld data using Herschel-Bulkley rheology. Journal of
Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 275, 71–84,
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2014.02.004
Cigolini, C., Laiolo, M., Ulivieri, G., Coppola, D. &
Ripepe, M. 2013. Radon mapping, automatic measure-
ments and extremely high 222Rn emissions during the
2002–2007 eruptive scenarios at Stromboli volcano.
Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research,
264, 49–65.
Cigolini, C., Laiolo, M. & Coppola, D. 2015. Revisiting
the last major eruptions of Stromboli volcano: infer-
ences on the role of volatiles during magma storage
and decompression. In: Zellmer, G., Edmonds, M.
& Straub, S. M. (eds) The Role of Volaties in the
Genesis, Evolution and Eruption of Arc Magmas. Geo-
logical Society, London, Special Publications, 410,
143–177, http://doi.org/10.1144/SP410.3
Coltelli, M., Proietti, C., Branca, S., Marsella, M.,
Andronico, D. & Lodato, L. 2007. Analysis of the
2001 lava ﬂow eruption of Mt. Etna from three-
dimensional
mapping.
Journal
of
Geophysical
Research, 112, F02029.
Coppola, D. & Cigolini, C. 2013. Thermal regimes and
effusive trends at Nyamuragira volcano (DRC) from
MODIS infrared data. Bulletin of Volcanology, 75,
1–15, http://doi.org/10.1007/s00445-013-0744-z
Coppola, D., Piscopo, D., Laiolo, M., Cigolini, C.,
Delle Donne, D. & Ripepe, M. 2012. Radiative
heat power at Stromboli volcano during 2000–2011:
twelve years of MODIS observations. Journal of
Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 215–216,
48–60.
Coppola, D., Laiolo, M., Piscopo, D. & Cigolini, C.
2013. Rheological control on the radiant density of
active lava ﬂows and domes. Journal of Volcanology
and Geothermal Research, 249, 39–48, http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2012.09.005
Coppola, D., Laiolo, M., Delle Donne, D. & Ripepe,
M. & Cigolini, C. 2014. Hot-spot detection and
characterization of strombolian activity from MODIS
infrared
data.
International
Journal
of
Remote
Sensing, 35, 3403–3426.
Corsaro, R. A. & Miraglia, L. 2014. The transition from
summit to ﬂank activity at Mt. Etna, Sicily (Italy):
inferences from the petrology of products erupted in
2007–2009. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research, 275, 51–60, http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvol
geores.2014.02.009
Davies, A. G., Keszthelyi, L. & McEwen, A. S. 2011.
Estimating eruption temperature from thermal emis-
sion spectra of lava fountain activity in the Erta’Ale
(Ethiopia) volcano lava lake: implications for observ-
ing Io’s volcanoes. Geophysical Research Letters,
38, L21308, http://doi.org/10.1029/2011GL049418
Dean, K. G., Servilla, M., Roach, A., Foster, B. &
Engle, K. 1998. Satellite monitoring of remote volca-
noes improves study efforts in Alaska. Eos, Trans-
actions of the American Geophysical Union, 79,
422–423.
Dehn, J., Dean, K. G. & Engle, K. 2000. Thermal moni-
toring of North Paciﬁc volcanoes from space. Geology,
28, 755–758.
Del Negro, C., Cappello, A., Neri, M., Bilotta, G.,
He´rault, A. & Ganci, G. 2013. Lava ﬂow hazards
at Mount Etna: constraints imposed by eruptive
history and numerical simulations. Nature Scientiﬁc
Reports, 3, http://doi.org/10.1038/srep03493
Favalli, M., Pareschi, M. T., Neri, A. & Isola, I. 2005.
Forecasting lava ﬂow paths by a stochastic approach.
Geophysical Research Letters, 32, L03305, http://
doi.org/10.1029/2004GL021718
Flynn, L. P., Harris, A. J. L., Rothery, D. A. & Oppen-
heimer, C. 2000. High-spatial-resolution thermal
remote sensing of active volcanic features using
landsat and hyperspectral data. In: Mouginis-Mark,
P. J., Crisp, J. A. & Fink, J. H. (eds) Remote Sensing
of Active Volcanism. American Geophysics Union,
Geophysical
Monograph
Series,
116,
161–177,
http://doi.org/10.1029/GM116p0161
Flynn, L. P., Harris, A. J. L. & Wright, R. 2001.
Improved identiﬁcation of volcanic features using
Landsat 7 ETM + . Remote Sensing of Environment,
79, 1–14.
Ganci, G., Harris, A. J. L. et al. 2012a. A year of lava
fountaining at Etna: volumes from SEVIRI. Geophysi-
cal Research Letters, 39, L06305, http://doi.org/10.
1029/2012GL051026
Ganci, G., Vicari, A., Cappello, A. & Del Negro, C.
2012b. An emergent strategy for volcano hazard
assessment: from thermal satellite monitoring to lava
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 24 =====
ﬂow modeling. Remote Sensing of Environment, 119,
197–207.
Garel, F., Kaminski, E., Tait, S. & Limare, A. 2012. An
experimental study of the surface thermal signature of
hot subaerial isoviscous gravity currents: implications
for thermal monitoring of lava ﬂows and domes.
Journal of Geophysical Research, 117, B02205.
Garel, F., Kaminski, E., Tait, S. & Limare, A. 2014.
An analogue study of the inﬂuence of solidiﬁcation
on the advance and surface thermal signature of lava
ﬂows. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 396,
46–55.
GLOBAL VOLCANISM PROGRAM 2010. Report on
Stromboli (Italy). In: Wunderman, R. (ed.) Bulletin
of the Global Volcanism Network, 35, (3). Smithsonian
Information,
Washington,
DC,
http://doi.org/10.
5479/si.GVP.BGVN201003-211040
Gouhier, M., Harris, A. J. L., Calvari, S., Labazuy, P.,
Gue´henneux, Y., Donnadieu, F. & Valade, S.
2012. Lava discharge during Etna’s January 2011 ﬁre
fountain tracked using MSG-SEVIRI. Bulletin of
Volcanology, 74, 787–793, http://doi.org/10.1007/
s00445-011-0572-y
Harris, A. J. L. 2013. Thermal Remote Sensing of Active
Volcanoes. A User’s Manual. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Harris, A. J. L. & Baloga, S. M. 2009. Lava discharge
rates from satellite-measured heat ﬂux. Geophysi-
cal Research Letters, 36, L19302, http://doi.org/10.
1029/2009GL039717
Harris, A. J. L. & Neri, M. 2002. Volumetric obser-
vations during paroxysmal eruptions at Mount Etna:
pressurized drainage of a shallow chamber or pulsed
supply? Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research, 116, 79–95.
Harris, A. J. L., Swabey, S. E. J. & Higgins, J.
1995. Automated thresholding of active lavas using
AVHRR
data.
International
Journal
of
Remote
Sensing, 16, 3681–3686.
Harris, A. J. L., Flynn, L. P., Keszthelyi, L.,
Mouginis-Mark, P. J., Rowland, S. K. & Resing,
J.
A.
1998. Calculation
of
lava effusion rates
from Landsat TM data. Bulletin of Volcanology, 60,
52–71.
Harris, A. J. L., Murray, J. B. et al. 2000. Effusion rate
trends at Etna and Kraﬂa and their implications for
eruptive mechanisms. Journal of Volcanology and
Geothermal Research, 102, 237–270.
Harris, A. J. L., Steffke, A., Calvari, S. & Spampinato,
L. 2011. Thirty years of satellite-derived lava dis-
charge rates at Etna: implications for steady volumet-
ric output. Journal of Geophysical Research, 116,
B08204, http://doi.org/10.1029/2011JB008237
Inguaggiato, S., Vita, F., Rouwet, D., Bobrowski, N.,
Morici, S. & Sollami, A. 2011. Geo-chemical evi-
dence of the renewal of volcanic activity inferred
from CO2 soil and SO2 plume ﬂuxes: the 2007 Strom-
boli eruption (Italy). Bulletin of Volcanology, 73,
443–456.
INGV 2012. Online resource at: http://www.ct.ingv.it/it/
component/content/article/11-notizie/news/538
IRIS SPECIAL REPORT 2002. Nyiragongo Volcano.
http://www.iris.washington.edu/news/events/congo/
congo.htm
Kervyn, M., Harris,, A. J. L., Mbede, E., Belton, F.,
Jacobs, P. & Ernst, G. G. J. 2006. MODLEN:
a semi-automated algorithm for monitoring small
scale thermal activity at Oldoinyo Lengai Volcano
Tanzania. Paper presented at the AMG ’06. Quan-
titative Geology from Multiple Sources, International
Association Mathematical Geology, XI Annual Confer-
ence, 3–8 September 2006, Liege, Belgium, http://
doi.org/1854/5913 (http://hdl.handle.net/1854/LU-
347378).
Koeppen, W., Pilger, E. & Wright, R. 2011. Time
series analysis of low resolution thermal infrared satel-
lite data for detecting thermal anomalies: a hybrid
approach. Bulletin of Volcanology, 73, 577–593.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00445-010-0427-y
Lombardo, V. & Buongiorno, M. F. 2006. Lava
ﬂow thermal analysis using three infrared bands of
remote-sensing imagery: a study case from Mount
Etna 2001 eruption. Remote Sensing of Environment,
101, 141–149.
Lombardo, V., Harris, A. J. L., Calvari, S. & Buon-
giorno, M. F. 2009. Spatial variations in lava ﬂow
ﬁeld thermal structure and effusion rate derived from
very high spatial resolution hyperspectral (MIVIS)
data. Journal of Geophysical Research, 114, B02208,
http://doi.org/10.1029/2008JB005648
Neri, M. & Acocella, V. 2006. The 2004–2005 Etna
eruption: implications for ﬂank deformation and struc-
tural behaviour of the volcano. Journal of Volcanology
and Geothermal Research, 158, 195–206.
Nishihama, M., Wolfe, R. E., Solomon, D., Patt, F. S.,
Blanchette, J., Fleig, A. J. & Masuoka, E. 1997.
MODIS Level 1A Earth Location Algorithm Theoreti-
cal Basis Document Version 3.0. SDST-092. Labora-
tory for Terrestrial Physics, NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD.
Oppenheimer, C. 1991. Lava ﬂow cooling estimated from
Landsat Thematic Mapper infrared data: the Lonqui-
may eruption (Chile, 1989). Journal of Geophysical
Research, 96, 21,865–21,878.
Patrick, M. R., Dehn, J. et al. 2003. The 1997 eruption
of Okmok volcano, Alaska: a synthesis of remotely
sensed imagery. Journal of Volcanology and Geother-
mal Research, 127, 89–107.
Pergola, N., Marchese, F. & Tramutoli, V. 2004.
Automated detection of thermal features of active vol-
canoes by means of infrared AVHRR records. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 93, 311–327.
Pieri, D. C. & S. M. Baloga, M. 1986. Eruption rate, area,
and length relationships for some Hawaiian lava ﬂows.
Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 30,
29–45,http://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0273(86)90066-1
Piscini, A. & Lombardo, V. 2014. Volcanic hot spot
detection from optical multispectral remote sensing
data using artiﬁcial neural networks. Geophysical Jour-
nal International, 196, 1525–1535.
Proietti, C., Coltelli, M., Marsella, M. & Fujita, E.
2009. A quantitative approach for evaluating lava
ﬂow simulation reliability: lavaSIM code applied to
the 2001 Etna eruption. Geochemistry, Geophysics,
Geosystems, 10, Q09003, http://doi.org/10.1029/
2009GC002426
Ramsey, M. S. & Harris, A. J. L. 2012. Volcanology
2020: how will thermal remote sensing of volcanic
D. COPPOLA ET AL.
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 


===== PAGE 25 =====
surface activity evolve over the next decade? Jour-
nal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 249,
217–233.
Ripepe, M., Delle Donne, D., Lacanna, G., March-
etti, E. & Ulivieri, G. 2009. The onset of the 2007
Stromboli effusive eruption recorded by an integrated
geophysical network. Journal of Volcanology and
Geothermal Research, 182, 131–136.
Steffke, A. M. & Harris, A. J. L. 2011. A review
of algorithms for detecting volcanic hot spots in
satellite
infrared
data.
Bulletin
of
Volcanology,
73, 1109–1137, http://doi.org/10.1007/s00445-011-
0487-7
Takagi, D. & Huppert, H. E. 2010. Initial advance of long
lava ﬂows in open channels. Journal of Volcanology
and Geothermal Research, 195, 121–126.
Toller, G. N., Isaacman, A. & Kuyper, J. 2006.
MODIS Level 1B Product User’s Guide. Prepared by
Members of the MODIS Characterization Support
Team for NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Green-
belt, MD.
Vicari, A., Ciraudo, A., Del Negro, C., Herault, A. &
Fortuna, L. 2009. Lava ﬂow simulations using dis-
charge rates from thermal infrared satellite imagery
during the 2006 Etna eruption. Natural Hazards,
50, 539–550, http://doi.org/10.1007/s11069–008-
9306-7
Wadge, G. 1981. The variation of magma discharge dur-
ing basaltic eruptions. Journal of Volcanology and
Geothermal Research, 11, 139–168.
Wooster, M. J., Zhukov, B. & Oertel, D. 2003. Fire
radiative energy for quantitative study of biomass
burning: derivation from the BIRD experimental satel-
lite and comparison to MODIS ﬁre products. Remote
Sensing of Environments, 86, 83–107.
Wright, R. & Flynn, L. P. 2003. On the retrieval of
lava ﬂow surface temperatures from infrared satellite
data. Geology, 31, 893–896, http://doi.org/10.1130/
G19645.1
Wright, R., Blake, S., Harris, A. J. L. & Rothery,
D. A. 2001. A simple explanation for the space-based
calculation of lava eruption rates. Earth and Planetary
Science Letters, 192, 223–233.
Wright, R., Flynn, L. P., Garbeil, H., Harris, A. J. L. &
Pilger, E. 2002. Automated volcanic eruption detec-
tion using MODIS. Remote Sensing of Environments,
82, 135–155.
Wright, R., Garbeil, H. & Harris, A. J. L. 2008. Using
infrared satellite data to drive a thermo-rheological/
stochastic lava ﬂow emplacement model: a method
for near-real-time volcanic hazard assessment. Geo-
physical Research Letters, 35, L19307, http://doi.org/
10.1029/2008GL035228
Wright, R., Garbeil, H. & Davies, A. G. 2010. Cool-
ing rate of some active lavas determined using an
orbital imaging spectrometer. Journal of Geophysi-
cal Research, 115, B06205, http://doi.org/10.1029/
2009JB006536
Wright, R., Glaze, L., & Baloga, S. M. 2011. Con-
straints on determining the eruption style and compo-
sition of terrestrial lavas from space. Geology, 39,
1127–1130.
Zaksˇek, K., Shirzaei, M. & Hort, M. 2013. Constraining
the uncertainties of volcano thermal anomaly monitor-
ing using a Kalman ﬁlter technique. In: Pyle, D. M.,
Mather, T. A. & Biggs, J. (eds) Remote Sensing of
Volcanoes and Volcanic Processes: Integrating Obser-
vation and Modelling. Geological Society, London,
Special Publications, 380, 137–160, http://doi.org/
10.1144/SP380.5
ENHANCED VOLCANIC HOTSPOT DETECTION
 at Carleton University Library on June 24, 2015
http://sp.lyellcollection.org/
Downloaded from 
